# Codegen and understanding

I want to try a very challenging spike: code generation and understanding.

## The Spike

Codegen from "first principles"/ business rules e.g. compute accrual. Needs rules/subgoals for variable namings, return values, i.e. a "mapping" from needs to subgoal recipes in python

Understanding sw written in arbitrary ways is difficult as it incurs a "normalization" tax. Either we can express normalization rules in cnl, or we are doomed. Also we need semantic chunking i.e. the ability to set attributes or mint nodes when we recognize a subgraph (maybe we just need a rule to match a topology and mint something)

So first step is recognizing code generated by the system itself, to allow round trip. And when not recognize, allow externally supplying info via cnl (function f is sort_function) i.e. provide a  fact without relying on fact derivation

This allows us to create a catalog of software patterns and bridge the terminology with business rules eg The function shall compute accrual, and we provide a "business rules" definition of accrual computation in CNL. 

## On code writing
Code is written from "bottom" to top, via recursive subgoal expansion

The interesting thing: can we create rules based on a description of a procedure? E.g. "start from the bottom", return the computed value, compute the accrual and save it into the return value?!?!? Or are we humans just described what we have already imagined via "backwards" coding?

And where and when do we decide whether to put statements in a subfunction and whether to use a sequence of statements? We estimate the size? We ask "is this clearly a subcomputation that has a name?"

There is a tension between following a procedure ("forward", but not a fixpoint) vs backwards, where we have to "solve subgoals"). The procedure could define an order in which we have to solve subgoals

Also materializing a function call derives from something like "want x is sorted" , "call function z on x and z is sort_function produces x is sorted" -> "write call function z on x"

